---
layout: post
title: "Gravity"
date: 2017-07-28
tags: play, spatial, open3
externals:
- d3
- d3-queue
- d3-contour
- d3-scale-chromatic
- underscore
js:
- gravity.js
css:
- layout.css
- gravity.css
json:
- 0021500156.halfcourt.json
---

*"an MVP whose gravity is reaching planetary levels."* notes Ethan Strauss on an [old Dec 2015 article](http://www.espn.com/nba/story/_/id/14269158/how-stephen-curry-wrecks-defenses-touching-ball) about [Steph Curry](https://www.basketball-reference.com/players/c/curryst01.html). Gravity is currently one of the en vogue terms around the NBA. But can we quantify it? Can we see it or is it just a nebulous term that is in the eye of the beholder?

<div class="clear"></div>

<div class="pull pull-right">
  <div class="visualization" id="visualization-0"></div>
  <div class="play-controls" id="play-controls-0"></div>
</div>

Let's start by giving each player in our visualization from [before]({% post_url 2017-01-05-simple-play-visualization %}) a value of -1 if they are on offense, or +1 if they are on defense *(-1 acting like a gravity well or valley, +1 acting like a mountain)*. Then, using a spatial analysis tool called IDW or Inverse Distance Weighting, we can draw a set of contours (or a heat map) of all the points on the court. Points directly between a +1 and a -1 get a number between 1 and -1 based on how close it is to the other already known points. Then we simply assign a color somewhere on a Red-Blue color scale. This results in the visualization on the right.

So obviously there are a couple of things to improve. First being, in no universe is Noah Vonleh *(NH in visualization)* - a 24% 3 point shooter in 2015 - a threat from behind the arc. He should not be emitting that much gravity. And second, my IDW algorithm creates some artifical heights and valleys that don't really make any logical sense if you try to translate this analogy to the real world.

<div class="clear"></div>

<div class="pull pull-left">
  <div class="visualization" id="visualization-1"></div>
  <div class="play-controls" id="play-controls-1"></div>
</div>

So let's deal with the first. Player's shooting percentages are tracked by distance from the basket and are available at [stats.nba.com](http://stats.nba.com). So if we add those, and multiply them by the value of the shot attempted *(x2 for 2 point shots, x3 for 3 point shots)*, then we get a good approximation of how deadly that player is from the given location. This is a lot more nuanced than a simple -1 *(note: all offensive values are negative to reflect a negative or attractive gravity value)*. To match this bump in offensive gravity values *(theoretically maxed at -3 (100% shooting percentage from 3pt land))*, let's give all defenders a +3 to their defensive gravity for now.

The result is on the left. You can see a definite improvement in how the offensive players are being visualized. Right before the pass from CJ McCollum (CJ) to Maurice Harkless (MH), you can see the difference in gravity that Maurice is exhibiting (with a 29% 3P%) vs Noah (with a 33% long-2%). It's not much, but Rasual Butler (RB) chooses the wrong one, CJ makes the right pass, and Maurice nails the shot.

<div class="clear"></div>

<div class="pull pull-right">
  <div class="visualization" id="visualization-2"></div>
  <div class="play-controls" id="play-controls-2"></div>
</div>

So that leaves defense. [stats.nba.com](http://stats.nba.com) tracks the difference in shooting percentage that defenders force their assignments to have. While this is far from a perfect stat to use in this situation, it's a good start. We do the same trick with multiplying by 2's and 3's based on defender position *(one flaw here is that defenders will rarely be defending a 3 point shot while also in 3 point range themselves - so this isn't as pronounced as it should be)*.

Final result is on the right. Because defender gravity values now almost always below 1, we don't see their blue contours hardly at all. But the defender's influence is still visible. The other advantage of reducing the visual aspect of the defenders (while keeping their actual impact) is that wide open offensive players are lit up. See CJ McCollum after the basket is made. If the basket was missed and Ed Davis (ED) happened to get the rebound, CJ would have been exerting a ton of gravity due to his high 3P% and relative wide-openness. That would have gotten the defense scrambling, and most likely have led to another clean shot.

<div class="clear"></div>

The upshot of this visualization, is how it can show something as nebulous as "gravity". Bright red spots on the court are areas that the defense is probably thinking about (or definitely should be thinking about) and can easily overreact to. Put a red enough spot on the court, and that leaves all the other spots more open than they otherwise would be - aka, the Steph Curry effect.
